type of service provided by these consultants.

4 Buildings and Facilities

4.1 Design and Construction

4.10 Buildings and facilities used in the manufacture of intermediates and APIs
should be located, designed, and constructed to facilitate cleaning, maintenance, and
operations as appropriate to the type and stage of manufacture. Facilities should also
be designed to minimize potential contamination. Where microbiological
specifications have been established for the intermediate or API, facilities should also
be designed to limit exposure to objectionable microbiological contaminants as
appropriate.

4.11 Buildings and facilities should have adequate space for the orderly placement
of equipment and materials to prevent mix-ups and contamination.

4.12 Where the equipment itself (e.g., closed or contained systems) provides
adequate protection of the material, such equipment can be located outdoors.

4.13 The flow of materials and personnel through the building or facilities should be
designed to prevent mix-ups or contamination.

4.14 There should be defined areas or other control systems for the following
activities:
- Receipt, identification, sampling, and quarantine of incoming materials,
pending release or rejection;
- Quarantine before release or rejection of intermediates and APIs;
- Sampling of intermediates and APIs;
- Holding rejected materials before further disposition (e.g., return,
reprocessing or destruction)
- Storage of released materials;
- Production operations;
- Packaging and labelling operations; and
- Laboratory operations.

4.15 Adequate, clean washing and toilet facilities should be provided for personnel.
These washing facilities should be equipped with hot and cold water as appropriate.

5 Process Equipment

5.1 Design and Construction

5.10 Equipment used in the manufacture of intermediates and APIs should be of
appropriate design and adequate size, and suitably located for its intended use,
cleaning, sanitization (where appropriate), and maintenance.

5.11 Equipment should be constructed so that surfaces that contact raw materials,
intermediates, or APIs do not alter the quality of the intermediates and APIs beyond
the official or other established specifications.

5.12 Production equipment should only be used within its qualified operating
range.

5.13 Major equipment (e.g., reactors, storage containers) and permanently installed
processing lines used during the production of an intermediate or API should be
appropriately identified.

5.14 Any substances associated with the operation of equipment, such as lubricants,
heating fluids or coolants, should not contact intermediates or APIs so as to alter their
quality beyond the official or other established specifications. Any deviations from
this should be evaluated to ensure that there are no detrimental effects upon the fitness
for purpose of the material. Wherever possible, food grade lubricants and oils should
be used.

5.15 Closed or contained equipment should be used whenever appropriate. Where
open equipment is used, or equipment is opened, appropriate precautions should be
taken to minimize the risk of contamination.

5.16 A set of current drawings should be maintained for equipment and critical
installations (e.g., instrumentation and utility systems).

5.2 Equipment Maintenance and Cleaning

5.20 Schedules and procedures (including assignment of responsibility) should be
established for the preventative maintenance of equipment.

16

5.21 Written procedures should be established for cleaning of equipment and its
subsequent release for use in the manufacture of intermediates and APIs. Cleaning
procedures should contain sufficient details to enable operators to clean each type of
equipment in a reproducible and effective manner. These procedures should include:
- Assignment of responsibility for cleaning of equipment;
- Cleaning schedules, including, where appropriate, sanitizing schedules;
- A complete description of the methods and materials, including dilution of
cleaning agents used to clean equipment;
- When appropriate, instructions for disassembling and reassembling each
article of equipment to ensure proper cleaning;
- Instructions for the removal or obliteration of previous batch identification;
- Instructions for the protection of clean equipment from contamination prior to
use;
- Inspection of equipment for cleanliness immediately before use, if practical;
and
- Establishing the maximum time that may elapse between the completion of
processing and equipment cleaning, when appropriate.

5.22 Equipment and utensils should be cleaned, stored, and, where appropriate,
sanitized or sterilized to prevent contamination or carry-over of a material that would
alter the quality of the intermediate or API beyond the official or other established
specifications.

5.23 Where equipment is assigned to continuous production or campaign
production of successive batches of the same intermediate or API, equipment should
be cleaned at appropriate intervals to prevent build-up and carry-over of contaminants
(e.g. degradants or objectionable levels of micro-organisms).
5.24 Non-dedicated equipment should be cleaned between production of different
materials to prevent cross-contamination.
5.25 Acceptance criteria for residues and the choice of cleaning procedures and
cleaning agents should be defined and justified.
5.26 Equipment should be identified as to its contents and its cleanliness status by
appropriate means.

5.3 Calibration

5.30 Control, weighing, measuring, monitoring and test equipment that is critical
for assuring the quality of intermediates or APIs should be calibrated according to
written procedures and an established schedule.

17

5.31 Equipment calibrations should be performed using standards traceable to
certified standards, if existing.
5.32 Records of these calibrations should be maintained.
5.33 The current calibration status of critical equipment should be known and
verifiable.

5.34 Instruments that do not meet calibration criteria should not be used.
5.35 Deviations from approved standards of calibration on critical instruments
should be investigated to determine if these could have had an impact on the quality
of the intermediate(s) or API(s) manufactured using this equipment since the last
successful calibration.

5.4 Computerized Systems

5.40 GMP related computerized systems should be validated. The depth and scope
of validation depends on the diversity, complexity and criticality of the computerized
application.

5.41 Appropriate installation qualification and operational qualification should
demonstrate the suitability of computer hardware and software to perform assigned
tasks.

5.42 Commercially available software that has been qualified does not require the
same level of testing. If an existing system was not validated at time of installation, a
retrospective validation could be conducted if appropriate documentation is available.

5.43 Computerized systems should have sufficient controls to prevent unauthorized
access or changes to data. There should be controls to prevent omissions in data (e.g.
system turned off and data not captured). There should be a record of any data change
made, the previous entry, who made the change, and when the change was made.

5.44 Written procedures should be available for the operation and maintenance of
computerized systems.

5.45 Where critical data are being entered manually, there should be an additional
check on the accuracy of the entry. This can be done by a second operator or by the
system itself.

5.46 Incidents related to computerized systems that could affect the quality of
intermediates or APIs or the reliability of records or test results should be recorded
and investigated.

5.47 Changes to the computerized system should be made according to a change
procedure and should be formally authorized, documented and tested. Records should
be kept of all changes, including modifications and enhancements made to the

18

hardware, software and any other critical component of the system. These records
should demonstrate that the system is maintained in a validated state.

5.48 If system breakdowns or failures would result in the permanent loss of
records, a back-up system should be provided. A means of ensuring data protection
should be established for all computerized systems.

5.49 Data can be recorded by a second means in addition to the computer system.


6 Documentation and Records
