5.44 When setting up a programme for the packaging operations, particular attention should be
given to minimising the risk of cross-contamination, mix-ups or substitutions. Different
products should not be packaged in close proximity unless there is physical segregation.
5.45 Before packaging operations are begun, steps should be taken to ensure that the work area,
packaging lines, printing machines and other equipment are clean and free from any
products, materials or documents previously used, if these are not required for the current
operation. The line-clearance should be performed according to an appropriate check-list.
5.46 The name and batch number of the product being handled should be displayed at each
packaging station or line.
5.47 All products and packaging materials to be used should be checked on delivery to the
packaging department for quantity, identity and conformity with the Packaging
Instructions.
5.48 Containers for filling should be clean before filling. Attention should be given to avoiding
and removing any contaminants such as glass fragments and metal particles.
5.49 Normally, filling and sealing should be followed as quickly as possible by labelling. If it is
not the case, appropriate procedures should be applied to ensure that no mix-ups or
mislabelling can occur.
5.50 The correct performance of any printing operation (for example code numbers, expiry dates)
to be done separately or in the course of the packaging should be checked and recorded.
Attention should be paid to printing by hand which should be re-checked at regular
intervals.
5.51 Special care should be taken when using cut-labels and when over-printing is carried out
off-line. Roll-feed labels are normally preferable to cut-labels, in helping to avoid mix-ups.
5.52 Checks should be made to ensure that any electronic code readers, label counters or similar
devices are operating correctly.
5.53 Printed and embossed information on packaging materials should be distinct and resistant
to fading or erasing.
5.54 On-line control of the product during packaging should include at least checking the
following:
a) general appearance of the packages;
b) whether the packages are complete;
c) whether the correct products and packaging materials are used;
d) whether any over-printing is correct;
e) correct functioning of line monitors.
Samples taken away from the packaging line should not be returned.
5.55 Products which have been involved in an unusual event should only be reintroduced into
the process after special inspection, investigation and approval by authorised personnel.
Detailed record should be kept of this operation.
5.56 Any significant or unusual discrepancy observed during reconciliation of the amount of bulk
product and printed packaging materials and the number of units produced should be
investigated and satisfactorily accounted for before release.
5.57 Upon completion of a packaging operation, any unused batch-coded packaging materials
should be destroyed and the destruction recorded. A documented procedure should be
followed if uncoded printed materials are returned to stock.