5.61 Rejected materials and products should be clearly marked as such and stored separately in
 restricted areas. They should either be returned to the suppliers or, where appropriate,
 reprocessed or destroyed. Whatever action is taken should be approved and recorded by
 authorised personnel.
 5.62 The reprocessing of rejected products should be exceptional. It is only permitted if the
 quality of the final product is not affected, if the specifications are met and if it is done in
 accordance with a defined and authorised procedure after evaluation of the risks involved.
 Record should be kept of the reprocessing.
 5.63 The recovery of all or part of earlier batches which conform to the required quality by
 incorporation into a batch of the same product at a defined stage of manufacture should be
 authorised beforehand. This recovery should be carried out in accordance with a defined
 procedure after evaluation of the risks involved, including any possible effect on shelf life.
 The recovery should be recorded.
 5.64 The need for additional testing of any finished product which has been reprocessed, or into
 which a recovered product has been incorporated, should be considered by the Quality
 Control Department.
 5.65 Products returned from the market and which have left the control of the manufacturer
 should be destroyed unless without doubt their quality is satisfactory; they may be
 considered for re-sale, re-labelling or recovery in a subsequent batch only after they have
 been critically assessed by the Quality Control Department in accordance with a written
 procedure. The nature of the product, any special storage conditions it requires, its
 condition and history, and the time elapsed since it was issued should all be taken into
 account in this assessment. Where any doubt arises over the quality of the product, it
 should not be considered suitable for re-issue or re-use, although basic chemical re-
 processing to recover active ingredient may be possible. Any action taken should be
 appropriately recorded.